Southport riots: ‘English Defence League’ pelt police as fake news spreads
The mother of one of the three girls killed in Monday’s attack pleads for rioters who threw bricks at police to ‘stop the violence’ after misinformation spread online about the suspect

The mother of one of the girls killed in the Southport attack has pleaded with people to “stop the violence” after rioting broke out on Tuesday night.

Police were pelted with bricks and bottles and police vans were set alight as hundreds of people gathered outside a mosque on Tuesday night after misinformation about the suspect of the Southport attack was spread online.

Police vans were set on fire and video posted on social media showed large flames billowing around the vehicles. Protesters clashed with police wielding riot shields and batons with officers charging the crowds outside the mosque. There were chants of “No surrender” and “English ’til I die”.

It came after Twitter/X accounts spread false claims that the 17-year-old suspect was a Muslim asylum seeker. Three girls died in a “ferocious attack” at a Taylor Swift dance class on Monday. Five other children were stabbed and two adults trying to defend them were critically injured.

Jenni Stancombe — the mother of Elsie, 7, who died in Monday’s attack — appealed on social media for the rioting to end.

She wrote: “This is the only thing that I will write, but please stop the violence in Southport tonight.” She added: “The police have been nothing but heroic these last 24 hours and they and we don’t need this.”

Yvette Cooper, the home secretary, said that social media companies “need to take some responsibility” for speculation in the aftermath of the attack.

North West Ambulance Service said 39 officers had been injured following the violence on Tuesday evening and 27 of them were taken to hospital.

Merseyside police said eight officers had suffered serious injuries including fractures, a suspected broken nose and concussion. Three police dogs had also been hurt with two suffering leg injuries from bricks thrown at them, the force said, while police vehicles had been damaged and set alight.

Bricks were thrown, then bins, road signs and anything else the rioters could get their hands on. They cheered every time the crack of a mosque window breaking could be heard.

A scared and bewildered looking boy who had been brought along to the anti-immigrant protest in Southport asked the woman next to him: “Why is Daddy shouting?”

Zulficar Ibrahim had come to the mosque to pray. He said that he could not understand why rioters had decided to target such a “unifying” place where Muslims of all sects come to pray. “We just arrived now and the boys advised me not to go there because there’s a big problem happening,” he said.

He ducked out of the way of a stone as it flew towards him and added: “We never saw this type of thing. This is no good for Southport.”

Police officers were seen limping away from the scene. One female officer with a line of blood down her face stood steadfast holding a riot shield. A police van was set on fire and huge clouds of billowing smoke soared upwards as helicopters circled overhead. Flares and white paint were thrown at officers.

Young men were seen dashing into people’s front gardens and grabbing rocks to throw, egging each other on.

Patrick Hurley, the Labour MP for Southport, said the town’s grief had been hijacked by “thugs”.

He told Times Radio that there had been a “swirling morass on social media of lies and propaganda” since Monday’s attacks and he directly linked last night’s riots to messages online.

Hurley criticised the people who descended on the town as “beered-up thugs” in a separate interview on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.

Assistant Chief Constable Alex Goss said that it was “sickening to see this happening within a community that has been devastated by the tragic loss of three young lives”.

He added: “In the last 24 hours, we have seen overwhelming support and sympathy from the community and wider Merseyside communities for the families who are currently trying to deal with their loss and care for victims injured during the major incident.

“Yesterday, our officers and other members of the emergency services were faced with one of the most difficult situations they will ever face. Tonight, they find themselves being attacked as they endeavour to prevent disorder. The actions in Southport tonight will involve many people who do not live in the Merseyside area or care about the people of Merseyside.

“There has been much speculation and hypothesis around the status of a 17-year-old male who is currently in police custody and some individuals are using this to bring violence and disorder to our streets.

“We have already said that the person arrested was born in the UK and speculation helps nobody at this time. Our officers should not have to face this, but we will be there tonight to ensure the safety of the local community who have suffered enough, and will arrest those involved in criminal behaviour.”

A 24-hour Section 60 order giving officers enhanced stop-and-search powers has been introduced in the area, running until 7.54pm on Wednesday, the force added.

Earlier in the day Sir Keir Starmer was heckled on his visit to the murder scene, with one person shouting: “How many more, Starmer? When are you going to do something?” As the prime minister’s car left, another shouted: “How many more children? Our kids are dead and you’re leaving already?”

The prime minister said the rioters who “hijacked” the vigil would “feel the full force of the law”.

Sir Keir Starmer, the prime minister, had to be taken away by his protection officers when civilian men wearing body cameras heckled him with anti-immigrant abuse as he lay flowers for the children and adults who were stabbed

Writing on Twitter/X, Starmer said: “The people of Southport are reeling after the horror inflicted on them yesterday. They deserve our support and our respect. Those who have hijacked the vigil for the victims with violence and thuggery have insulted the community as it grieves. They will feel the full force of the law.”

The disinformation appears to have been spread by a Twitter/X account that purports to report breaking news. Within hours of the incident breaking, it falsely claimed that the suspect was an asylum seeker who had arrived by boat last year and was on an MI6 watch list. The post had reached nearly two million views by nightfall on Monday. A fake Muslim name was circulated and said to be the perpetrator’s.

Soyful Alam, the Imam of Southport Islamic Society Mosque, told The Times that many of the town’s Muslims were expecting a backlash after the stabbings and decided to pray from the safety of their homes. “Anything that happens there is always a blame on the Muslim [community[ until it is proven otherwise,” he said. “The incident is something which is hard to find words for and everyone is shocked and people are angry that incidents about this keep happening. All around the country we have terrible incidents and these need to stop and people who commit these crimes need to stop.”

A No 10 spokesman on Tuesday night said that police should be left to investigate without speculation about motive and circumstances and that there had been “some misreporting” that officers have had to correct.

Cooper said: “We need to recognise there are things taking place on social media that go against their terms and conditions, and their commitments. They need to take responsibility.”

Catherine Clarke, 48, a healthcare worker, watched the riot unfold from her house with her husband and father. They have lived in Southport all their lives and said they were disgusted by what they saw.

“Never in all my life have I seen anything like this in Southport,” Clarke said. “They are just idiots here to cause trouble and taking it out on innocent people, hiding behind hoods and masks, thinking they are clever. They are just yobs.”

Her husband, Jason, 50, a cleaner, said of the riot happening so soon after the peaceful vigil: “We’ve seen the best and worst of this town in the past two hours. It beggars belief.”

Her father, Brian Judd, 77, said: “They are throwing bricks at people who were trying to save kids yesterday. And they are laughing. It’s not funny. What is funny about this?

A neighbour emerged with an eight-year-old girl in pyjamas and said they were going to a relative’s house because the child was so frightened, while another boy was left crying in the street with his mother after the car they were in got caught in the riot.


UK interest rates cut to 5%
Bank of England rate-setters vote 5-4 to reduce rates by a quarter point from 16-year high

The Bank of England has cut interest rates for the first time in more than four years, providing much needed relief to millions of homeowners and families still reeling from the higher cost of living.

In a tightly contested decision announced at midday, members of the nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC), the group tasked with setting the UK base rate, lowered borrowing costs after holding them at their peak for the longest stretch in more than two decades.

The group voted 5-4 in favour of cutting the base rate by 0.25 percentage points from a 16-year high of 5.25 per cent. Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, backed cutting the base rate to 5 per cent.

The reduction in interest rates represents another milestone in the easing of the UK’s cost of living crisis. Borrowing costs started to increase from a record low of 0.1 per cent in December 2021 in order to tame inflation and then rose at the fastest pace in a generation, intensifying financial strain for millions of families.

The decision to loosen policy is likely to prompt banks to cut mortgage rates in the coming days. However, it will also result in less attractive deals for savers.

Headline consumer price index inflation has stabilised at the Bank of England’s 2 per cent target for the past two months, the lowest level since July 2021, fuelling speculation that the central bank would loosen monetary policy for the first time since March 2020.

The five members of the MPC who backed the quarter-point reduction said that they had seen enough evidence of a rebalancing in the labour market and an easing in wage growth. They reasoned that the “impact from past external shocks had abated and there had been some progress in moderating risks of persistence in inflation”.

Supply chain difficulties after the end of pandemic lockdowns and Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 pushed up inflation in the UK to a four-decade high of 11.1 per cent.

Bailey said: “Inflationary pressures have eased enough that we’ve been able to cut interest rates today.”

However, in a note of caution he warned households and businesses not to expect a rapid descent in borrowing costs. The Bank governor said: “We need to make sure inflation stays low, and be careful not to cut interest rates too quickly or by too much.”

He added: “Ensuring low and stable inflation is the best thing we can do to support economic growth and the prosperity of the country.”

Bailey’s reticence was reflected in the views of MPC members who voted to keep borrowing costs unchanged. These four members, including Huw Pill, the Bank’s chief economist, said that “underlying domestic inflationary pressures appeared more entrenched”, adding that interest rates in the long-term might need to remain restrictive to keep inflation at bay.

The 5-4 vote pattern demonstrates that a split has emerged among the committee over how resilient inflation will be over the coming months and, therefore, over how quickly interest rates should fall. Before the announcement, investors thought that the Bank would lower rates by about 0.50 percentage points or 0.75 percentage points this year.

There is anxiety among the MPC that price pressures will prove tough to tame after the reduction in energy costs slips out of the inflation calculation. The Bank said that inflation was set to jump to 2.75 per cent in the second half of this year “as declines in energy prices last year fall out of the annual comparison, revealing more clearly the prevailing persistence of domestic inflationary pressures”.

MPC members have consistently stressed that services inflation — a gauge of homegrown price dynamics — remains far too high at 5.7 per cent, well above the group’s forecasts. Wage growth is also elevated at 5.7 per cent.

The Bank also sharply upgraded its projections for GDP growth this year in forecasts released alongside the rate announcement. The economy is expected to expand by 1.25 per cent in 2024, up from a previous projection of 0.5 per cent, delivering a boost to the Labour government’s drive to reanimate growth.

In the run up to the August gathering, traders struggled to identify MPC members who might flip to favouring a rate cut after the Bank of England paused communications during the general election campaign. Rate-setters frequently deliver speeches that sketch out their thoughts on the severity of inflation and how they believe monetary policy should respond to those price pressures.

In the event, Bailey, the newly minted deputy governor Clare Lombardelli and Sarah Breeden joined fellow MPC members Dave Ramsden and Swati Dhingra in opting for a rate reduction. Jonathan Haskel, Catherine Mann, Megan Greene and Huw Pill wanted to keep rates on hold.

The rate reduction will be leveraged by the Labour government as a sign that the economy has already started to normalise under its short tenure. Sir Keir Starmer, the prime minister, has consistently blamed the Conservatives and, specifically, Liz Truss’s mini-budget for forcing interest rates higher.

Earlier this week Rachel Reeves, the chancellor, accused her predecessor, Jeremy Hunt, of covering up £21.9 billion of government overspending. She used the results of a Treasury audit of spending to scrap infrastructure projects and the winter fuel allowance for pensioners not in receipt of benefits. Reeves admitted that taxes are likely to rise at her first budget on October 30.

Reeves said on Thursday: “While today’s cut in interest rates will be welcome news, millions of families are still facing higher mortgage rates after the mini-budget. That is why this government is taking the difficult decisions now to fix the foundations of our economy after years of low growth, so we can rebuild Britain and make every part of our country better off.”

The MPC said it would make an announcement on the pace of bond sales over the coming year at its next meeting in September.


The Southport I know: a town of ordinary people living blameless lives
After a lifetime of experiencing the rare thrill of hearing my home town mentioned on TV or radio, listening to what we’ve heard this week makes you feel sick, says Patrick Maguire

In the 18th century, when it was all sand dunes and unnavigable marsh, Methodist missionaries called Southport “the wickedest place in all of England”. That line came horribly to mind when I learnt what had happened on Hart Street, where I spent countless Saturday afternoons in the house of a family friend who lived opposite the scene of this week’s tragedy, where three young girls were killed. I thought of it again when I watched thugs and racists kick down garden walls, assault police and terrorise our only mosque down the street from the church where my parents and grandparents married, and I was christened.

Yet I’m from Southport because — and what a sad sentence to write this now is — it’s the safest place you can imagine a kid growing up on Merseyside. My maternal grandfather was evacuated there from Wallasey, on the Wirral, during the war. He met my grandmother at a dance on the Promenade, at the Floral Hall, where the Beatles played two decades later. My parents met while backpacking in Australia. They tried Walthamstow for a couple of months on their return to England but it was probably inevitable that they would end up in Southport, where a painter and decorator can afford to live by the beach and won’t have to worry too much about where their children are. I don’t think they ever did.

Why would you? Nothing bad ever happened in the town. Our town motto is “Salus populi” — the welfare of the people — and that much we were always guaranteed. This is a place untouched by the tensions that haunt other places in the northwest. So uneventful is life most of the time that we still talk about a lifeboat tragedy that happened in 1886. Tucked tight on the southern edge of the Ribble Estuary, it’s a place you really have to look for. Our motorway links are terrible and it takes 44 minutes on a train from Liverpool. Good luck trying from Manchester. People come looking for a better life, or at the very least a nice day. Watching them come to throw bricks at police instead felt like a sick joke.

Until now, I’ve always loved telling people that I am from Southport, like AJP Taylor, Dan Dare, Lee Mack, Red Rum, Marc Almond from Soft Cell, the 1998 Mercury prizewinners Gomez, and the actress who played the woman from the Swindon branch of Wernham Hogg who got off with Tim in The Office. I was born there — before the closure of its maternity hospital — in 1995 and went to school there until 2013. Sadly, I now know that me, my three brothers and my sister all went to the same primary school as one of the victims.

For an adult who supposedly has a life in London, I return to Southport with almost embarrassing regularity. There’s a Fifties map of the town, printed by the Southport Visiter — our peerlessly named local paper — on the wall of my living room in Finsbury Park. Because I’m from Southport. Not “near Liverpool” or, God forbid, Stockport — the two things any Sandgrounder hears when they try to explain where exactly they’re from — but Southport.

Hearing that word on the telly, or seeing it in the paper, was a rare thrill. I still remember every time it happened. Neil and Christine Hamilton opening a new ride at Pleasureland in 2002. The 2003 Daily Mail article that said it was the best seaside town for shopping. Anthony King noting its swing to the Liberal Democrats on election night in 2005. That episode of Coronation Street where Ray Langton, Tracy Barlow’s absentee dad, returns to the cobbles with terminal cancer and suggests they go there to play crazy golf. Drawing Sheffield Wednesday at home in the first round of the FA Cup in 2010, live on ITV. Our own Tommy Fleetwood very nearly winning the US Open Championship in 2017. That woman who made the official Platinum Jubilee trifle.

These moments stick in my mind like national holidays because otherwise nobody took any notice of Southport. Now, after a lifetime of dignified obscurity, the town’s new-found notoriety feels nauseating.

The first time I ever got the Tube, aged ten, I remember an old man in a pinstriped suit asking me and my four siblings where we were from. Southport, we said. “That’s the place with all the sand,” he replied. Well, it was then. The pier — the whole mile of it, the second longest in England and the oldest built in iron — has been shut for a year. Everything on the front now looks a little jaundiced, not least Lord Street, the long, broad high street with glass colonnades that inspired Napoleon III to tell Hausmann to redesign Paris. No, seriously. Look it up.

Scousers call it posh, which is probably why so many of us tried to make ourselves sound like them as teenagers. It’s also why so many Scousers end up moving to Southport. They’re half-right: there’s plenty of poshness if you want to look for it. That’s why so many footballers call it home. My dad painted their houses. Everyone knows where Alan Hansen and Kenny Dalglish live. Pat Nevin, the former Everton winger, left for Chester after bumping into two Liverpool players within seconds of leaving his new flat. Alan Shearer, Gary Lineker, Mark Lawrenson: Southport, Southport, Southport.

But I would be doing us a disservice if I gave too much credence to the myth that we’re all posh wools — that’s short for woollyback, what you get called if you grew up outside of Liverpool proper. Nor are we the yobs you saw on Tuesday night. When I think of home I think of ordinary people working hard and getting on, living blameless lives in a quiet suburban town they chose to live in for a reason. Keir Starmer calls this sort of thing “ordinary hope”. Nowhere does it better. And I don’t care if it all sounds like a cliché. It’s true. That’s the point of Southport. Remember that when you read about us.


Kemi Badenoch: I’m a victim of hit job over bullying claims
The Tory leadership candidate has dismissed as ‘smears’ claims reported in The Guardian that she bullied former staff

Kemi Badenoch has claimed she is the victim of a “hit job”, as she dismissed allegations that she bullied civil service staff while serving as business secretary.

The Guardian reported that Badenoch is claimed to have created an intimidating atmosphere at the Department for Business and Trade.

However, the Conservative leadership hopeful said that the allegations come from a member of staff who was themselves accused of bullying and other “intolerable behaviour I would not stand for”.

Badenoch, who is the bookmakers’ favourite to be the next Tory leader, said the allegations were “smears” and that The Guardian was “acting for the Labour Party” to disrupt her campaign.

The Guardian article claimed that she was responsible for behaviour that traumatised staff, leading at least three of them to leave their jobs at the department. The claims include behaviour that meant staff “dreaded” meetings in which they alleged they were left humiliated or in tears.

Badenoch said, in a post on Twitter/X: “Let’s be clear: these allegations are smears from former staff who I sacked after they were accused of bullying behaviour, lying about other colleagues to cover up their own failures and general gross incompetence.”

She said that this was “intolerable behaviour I would not stand for”, and added that the Department for Business and Trade had confirmed there were no complaints and no investigations against her.

She said the accusations would not “stop me or my campaign” and claimed her efforts to be the next Conservative leader after the party’s rout at the general election had “spooked the lefties and now they’re coming for the one person they know can beat Keir Starmer”.

Badenoch, the MP for North West Essex, added: “The renewal of my party and the country is too important to let The Guardian, acting for the Labour Party, disrupt.”

A spokesman for Badenoch added that she has “high standards and expectations, and she has cultivated high-performing civil service teams who enjoy working with her”.

A Department for Business and Trade spokesperson said: “We cannot comment on individual HR matters. However, there have never been any formal complaints or investigations into the previous secretary of state’s conduct at this department.

“It is common for government departments to seek the views of civil servants and to discuss the results of those surveys in routine meetings with staff. We do not tolerate abuse or bullying of any kind.”


Starmer will reap rewards if he succeeds with planning deregulation
Labour’s pledge to loosen planning rules is a welcome move. The government should look around for other opportunities to loosen red tape

Labour’s election win has brought predictable warnings that business will soon find itself stuck in a new jungle of red tape. Fans of hands-off government admit they have been very disappointed by the increased burdens on business under the Tories. But Labour never saw a regulation it didn’t like and is bound to make things much worse, they say.

Yet wait a minute. By far Labour’s most important economic initiative is its pledge to shake up the planning system. And what sort of reform is this? At heart it’s an ambitious programme of deregulation. Labour is promising to loosen the rules to get more houses and wind farms built.

The appeal of this sort of deregulation is that it should boost the economy at little upfront cost to the taxpayer. Labour is pinning everything on reviving growth yet has no money to play with. So why not look for other things to liberalise?

Because Labour politicians are instinctive regulators, reply the critics. Just look at its manifesto which proposed 62 policies that would increase the regulatory burden on business and only 13 that would decrease it, said the Institute of Economic Affairs, the free-market think tank. The cost of these is likely to be much higher than Labour’s £8.6 billion of proposed tax increases, it claimed.

To be fair, Labour has talked about cutting the regulatory burden in some other industries, notably financial services. Sir Keir Starmer has also pledged to reduce the new trade red tape generated by Brexit.

But even some of Labour’s strongest supporters among business leaders fear ministers will struggle to resist the inevitable public pressure for more regulation in all sorts of areas. This pressure has only increased in recent years thanks to the perceived failings of many of the industry regulators, from energy to water.

Some critics warn that Labour’s plan to set up a new Regulatory Innovation Office will dilute the focus of the bodies put in place by the Tories to curb excessive red tape. Those with long memories will recall similar concerns when, after Tony Blair’s victory in 1997, Labour replaced the Tories’ Deregulation Unit with a Better Regulation Unit.

But both Blair and his chancellor Gordon Brown were convinced of the need to avoid over-regulation. They provided strong backing to the better regulation effort which supporters insist was effective in at least slowing the growth in red tape.

The cause of deregulation has been badly discredited since then. The huge damage caused in the UK by the global financial crisis was widely blamed on “light touch” financial regulation in the Blair and Brown years. More recently, Brexit supporters claimed that leaving the EU would result in a low-regulation nirvana that has failed to materialise while Liz Truss’s promise of a “red tape bonfire” ended in disaster.

Yet that doesn’t mean her claims about the cost of regulation were wrong. Business leaders say that complying with regulations is one of their biggest challenges. The increasing burden of regulation partly explains the puzzling slowdown in productivity growth across developed economies in recent years argues Wall Street strategist Ruchir Sharma in his new book What Went Wrong with Capitalism. That is why campaigners say ministers should scrutinise proposals for new regulations as carefully as they do new taxes.

Sceptics point out that when the Tory government asked businesses which EU rules they would like scrapped the list was remarkably short. But that only underlines the difficulty of relaxing rules, however costly, after they have been implemented. Once they have adjusted to new regulations, incumbent businesses often have little interest in removing barriers that make it more difficult for challengers to compete with them.

The Tories’ repeated attempts to reform planning show how tough deregulation can be. But there will be handsome rewards for Starmer if he succeeds. And, if he does, perhaps he could look around for other opportunities to loosen red tape.


Investors should set great store in Big Yellow
Growth and takeover possibilities make self-storage company an attractive buy

The growth of self-storage in the UK is a fascinating social phenomenon. While there are many practical reasons for paying to pack a household’s goods into a windowless cell, such as moving or renovating the family home, that is only part of what is driving the sector’s expansion. While a storage unit can in effect become a cheap house extension, we seem to be aping Americans’ inability to throw things away.

A US television advertisement summed it up. A wife tries to dispose of her middle-aged husband’s old baseball helmet and mitt, only for him to plead: “It’s part of who I am.” Not for nothing is that country the self-storage world’s king, with $80 billion annual revenue compared with the UK’s $1.3 billion. So far, only a few per cent of Britons rent this type of space, against 19 per cent in the US. But UK penetration is well ahead of Europe and is growing.

Those trends are fertile ground for the UK market leader, Big Yellow, a real estate investment trust. Starting in 1998 with a single unit in Richmond, Surrey, it now has 109. In a timely piece of public relations, the week after the general election it secured planning permission for a 68,400 sq ft installation in the heart of the prime minister Sir Keir Starmer’s beloved Kentish Town. Typical rent is £22 a week for 50 sq ft.

The group’s results for the year to March 31 showed revenue 6 per cent higher at £199.6 million, a jump in pre-tax profit from £75.3 million to £241 million, earnings per share up from 40.1p to 127.1p, year-end occupancy levels of 80.9 per cent, down from 83.2 per cent the previous year, and net rent per square foot £34.14, a 5 per cent rise.

In the first quarter of the current year, revenue was £50.2 million, from £48.1 million a year ago, 3.2 per cent higher on a like-for-like basis. ​​The chairman, Nick Vetch, said: “We have an opportunity to generate in excess of £50 million of net operating income from a combination of delivering the income from our pipeline stores and leasing up the existing fully built 1.4 million sq ft of vacant space.”

That picture is in stark contrast to the message from Big Yellow’s close rival, Safestore, which this column examined on July 18. Like-for-like revenues there fell 0.3 per cent in its first half-year. UK revenue shrank 1.5 per cent, thanks to mostly flat rates and weaker occupancy rates. Both companies have nearly half their stores in London, but Safestore has ventured into the so far less receptive European mainland while Big Yellow has so far confined itself to Britain.

None of this is lost on the monster charging up the front path. The world’s biggest self-store firm, Public Storage, has a 35 per cent-owned proxy on this side of the Atlantic, Shurgard which operates 250 stores from Stockholm to Marseilles and this year bought Lok’n Store in the UK, taking its estate here from 48 to 100 at a price of 70 times 2023 earnings. “It’s all about your needs and peace of mind,” its publicity purrs, but plainly only the monopolies authorities stand between Shurgard and a clean sweep of the UK. It is hard to see the new government making a political stand on that, but it will want to maintain competition.

That of course can be an attraction for investors in Big Yellow, where the share register is bristling with expectant US funds such as BlackRock, Fidelity and Vanguard, plus the Canada Pension Plan. The shares have had a strong run this year, from £10 in February to £12.64 in June and now drawing breath at about £11.86. In those circumstances, bearing in mind the Lok’n Store price, the shares look decent value, with the investment bank Jefferies predicting a 20 price-earnings for the current year’s profits, and a 4.2 per cent dividend yield. The Big Yellow management should be straining every sinew to boost those numbers before Shurgard comes knocking.

June 2021 seems a long time ago now. Covid was still among us and a string of companies took advantage of the housebound population to float household services on the stock market at highly optimistic valuations. Among those on the Aim exchange was Victorian Plumbing, Britain’s leading bathroom retailer.

The chief executive, 45-year-old Mark Radcliffe, and his family unloaded £260 million of shares and £11 million was raised for the business as the shares were placed among eager institutions at 262p. Frenetic early dealings took the price to 306p, but within 15 months they had plummeted to 35p and have since climbed unsteadily to just above 90p after touching 97p in May.

The company’s latest announcement explained that lower shipping costs and more own-brand sales contributed to a 40 per cent increase in pre-tax profit to £11.5 million for the half-year to the end of March, despite sales remaining flat at 144.6 million in a recovering sector.

Radcliffe added the sweetener that it has bought the confusingly similarly-named ailing online competitor, Victoria Plum, for £22.5 million. That brand will be extinguished, but integration costs will hold back profits until next year. The hope is that by then lower interest rates and economic growth will restore the public thirst for new bathrooms.

Peel Hunt’s analysts see revenue growing from a modest £291 million in the current year to £340 million two years hence, taking adjusted pre-tax profit from £19.1 million to £27.7 million. That would lead to earnings per share, adjusted and fully diluted, from 4.4p a share to 6.4p for a reasonable but not bargain-basement 14.5 price/earnings ratio. However, the dividend yield could reach a tasty 5.6 per cent by then.

Now that it has absorbed Victoria Plum, the group would be attractive to a bigger group but for the Radcliffe family’s controlling shareholding and the chief executive’s relative youth. However, two institutions, Kayne Anderson Rudnick Investment Management and BlackRock, own 6.7 per cent and may begin manoeuvres if they do not see progress.
